# 10A Compilation

## Interpretation vs Compilation

> In interpretation, we're raising the machine to the level of our language, like Lisp. In compilation we're taking our program and lowering it to the language that's spoken by the machine.

> The compiler can produce code that will execute more efficiently. The essential reason for that is that if you think about the register operations that are running, the interpreter has to produce register operations which, in principle, are going to be general enough to execute any Lisp procedure. Whereas the compiler only has to worry about producing a special bunch of register operations for, for doing the particular Lisp procedure that you've compiled.

> Or another way to say that is that the interpreter is a general purpose simulator, that when you read in a Lisp procedure, then those can simulate the program described by that, by that procedure. So the interpreter is worrying about making a general purpose simulator, whereas the compiler, in effect, is configuring the thing to be the machine that the interpreter would have been simulating. So the compiler can be faster.

the lisp interpreter (implemented as a register-machine simulator running the explicit-control evaluator plus primitive operations) takes a Lisp program like factorial and executes it. the combined system behaves like a factorial machine, but it is still a general-purpose evaluator interpreting the program.

the lisp compiler takes a lisp program like factorial and translates it into instructions for the target register machine. That compiled code is then combined with the runtime support / primitive operations, and when run on the register machine it behaves like a specialized factorial machine.

if interpreted and compiled code have the same register conventions  then they can interop (allowing them to call eachother)

to compile some program `(f x)` we could run it through the interpreter and save the machine operations instead of running them, except that is if there is a predicate you don't know which branch you would have gone down. for that you can transform `(if P A B)` to

```scheme
<interpeted code for P, result goes in VAL>
(branch (true? VAL) labelA)
<interpreted code for B>
(goto label-after-conditional)
(labelA <interpreted code for A>)
(label-after-conditional)
```

> already that's going to be more efficient than the evaluator. if you watch the evaluator run, it's not only generating the register operations we wrote down, it's also doing things to decide which ones to generate

> what the evaluator's doing is simultaenously analyzing the code to see what to do and running these operations ... in the compiler, it's happened once.

## Compiling (F X)

register operations in interpreting `(F X)`

```scheme
(assign unev (operands (fetch exp)))                  ; X
(assign exp (operator (fetch exp)))                   ; this is just F, and we can replace subsequent (fetch exp) by just F
(save continue)
(save env)
(save unev)
(assign continue eval-args)                           ; irrelevant to the compiler because we don't need a post-analysis phase
(assign val (lookup-var-val (fetch exp) (fetch env)))
(restore unev)
(restore env)
(assign fun (fetch val))
(save fun)
(assign argl '())
(save argl)
(assign exp (first-operand (fetch unev)))
(assign continue accumulate-last-arg)
(assign val (lookup-var-val (fetch exp) (fetch env)))
(restore argl)
(assign argl (cons (fetch val) (fetch argl)))
(restore fun)
; computation proceeds at apply-dispatch
```

> So in some sense, you don't want unev and exp at all. See what they really are in some sense, those aren't registers of the actual machine that's supposed to run, those are registers that have to do with arranging the thing that can simulate that machine.

register operations in compiling (F X)

```scheme
(save env)
(assign val (lookup-var-val 'f (fetch env)))
(restore env)
(assign fun (fetch val))
(save fun)
(assign argl '())
(save argl)
(assign val (lookup-var-val 'x (fetch env)))
(restore argl)
(assign argl (cons (fetch val) (fetch argl)))
(restore fun)
; computation proceeds at apply-dispatch
```

by going to `apply-dispatch` when applying procedures , we allow interpreted code and compiled code to call each other.

there are still redundant instructions. the environment didn't change between the save and restore, and the argument list didn't change between the save and restore.

> ... the evaluator has to be maximally pessimistic, because as far from its point of view it's just going off to evaluate something so it better save what it's going to need later. But once you've done the analysis, the compiler is in a position to say, well, what actually did I need to save? ... it doesn't need to be as careful as the evaluator, because it knows what it actually needs.

eliminating unnecessary stack procedures further (like saving registers that aren't used at all)

```scheme
(assign fun (lookup-var-val 'f (fetch env)))
(assign val (lookup-var-val 'x (fetch env)))
(assign argl (cons (fetch val) '()))
; computation proceeds at apply-dispatch
```

## Compiler Basic Structure

have some strategies for what needs to be preserved

```
; for (op A B)

1 {compile OP; result in FUN}
2 {compile A; result in VAL}
3 (assign ARGL (cons (fetch VAL) '()))
4 {compile A2; result in VAL}
5 (assign ARGL (cons (fetch VAL) (fetch ARGL)))
6 (goto apply-dispatch)

; 1 preserving ENV
; 2-3 preserving ENV
; 4 preserving ARGL
; 2-5 preserving FUN
```

which depends on the operation of what it means to append two code sequences while preserving registers

```
; append seq1 and seq2 preserving REGISTER

; (the interpreter must always take this option)
; if seq1 needs REGISTER and seq2 modifies REGISTER
(save REGISTER)
<SEQ1>
(restore REGISTER)
<SEQ2>

; otherwise
<SEQ1>
<SEQ2>
```

which depends on what it means to have sequences of instructions that know which registers are needed and modified. if we have the syntax

`<sequence of instructions; set of registers modified; set of registers needed>`

e.g. 

`<(assign R1 (fetch R2)); {R1}; {R2}>`

then we can combine two sequences

`<S1; M1; N1> and <S2; M2; N2>`

to form 

`<S1 and S2; M1 ∪ M2; N1 ∪ [N2-M2]>`
