# 9B Explicit-control Evaluator

> LISP is not good for solving any particular problems. What LISP is good for is contructing within it the right language to solve the problems you want to solve.

> If we implement lisp in terms of a register machine, then everything ought to become, at this point, completely concrete. All the magic should go away.

```
+--> user
|     |
|     | characters
|     v
|   reader ----> list structure memory
|     |
|     | list structure
|     v
|    eval -----> primitive operations
|     |
|     | answer
|     v
|   printer
+-----+
```

register usage in evaluator machine

- `exp` - expression to be evaluated (eval)
- `env` - evaluation environment (eval)
- `fun` - procedure to be applied (apply)
- `argl` - list of evaluated arguments (apply)
- `continue` - place to go to next (recursion/done)
- `val` - result of evaluation
- `unev` - temporary register for expressions

> A lot of people think [that] the reason you need a stack and recursion in an evaluator is because you might be evaluating recursive procedures ... the reason that you need recursion in the evaluator is because the evaluation process, itself, is recursive.

> We've reduced evaluating F,X,Y in environment E0 to evaluate plus A B in E1. And notice, nothing's on the stack, right? It's a reduction. At this point, the machine does not contain, as part of its state, the fact that it's in the middle of evaluating some procedure called F ... There's no accumulated state ... That's the meaning of, when we used to write in the substitution model, this expression reduces to that expression. 

> You have to make these new environment frames but you dont't have to hang onto them when you're done. They can be garbage collected or the space can be reused automatically ... so these procedures really are iterative procecdures

## Recursion

```
fourth call to fact-rec

EXP: (fact-rec n)
ENV: E4

CONTINUE: accumulate-last-arg

STACK: 
  (3)                  <ARGL>
  <primitive-*>        <FUN>
  accumulate-lats-arg  <CONTINUE>
  (4)                  <ARGL>
  <primitive-*>        <FUN>
  accumulate-lats-arg  <CONTINUE>
  (5)                  <ARGL>
  <primitive-*>        <FUN>
  accumulate-lats-arg  <CONTINUE>
```

> ... this evaluator is managing to take these procedures and execute some of them iteratively and some of them recursively, even though, as syntactically, they look like recursive procedures. How's it managing to do that? Well, the basic reason it's managing to do that is the evaluator is set up to save only what it needs later. So, for example, at the point where you've reduced evaluating an expression and an environment to applying a procedure to some arguments, it doesn't need that original environment anymore because any environment stuff will be packaged inside the procedures where the application's going to happen.

> Here's the actual thing that's making it [the evaluator] tail recursive. Remember, it's the restore of continue. It's saying when I go off to evaluate the procedure body, I should tell eval to come back to the place where that original evaluation was supposed to come back to.
